There was, I would say a girl, only she was a little
older than a girl, but somebody that I had taught
that one year. She came back to Brady and lived with
a lady that lived just behind me. And she came over
one day. It must have been early August of 45. And
I'd been hearing from Earl from Le Havre, which was
a place where they shipped them home from. And she
said, you've just got to go with me. See, she
married a New Yorker, and she had the car. And he was
back, and he wanted her to get on up there. And so.
I remember calling my parents and seeing if they
would keep the two children. They said, yeah. So
they came and got them. We left the next day and
drove nonstop to New York City. And by then, she
said that she hadn't been able to get anybody to
ride with her. But by the time we left, there was a
young man who was in the Navy. But we all knew him
from high school. He early coached him. And a young
woman that we didn't know, but her husband was in
the Navy up there somewhere. So there were four of
us. And we saved the one young man for the night
driving. And then we'd take turns sitting next to
him so we'd keep him awake. And the other young
woman didn't know how to drive. So the owner of the
car and I did the daytime driving. And the only
thing I can remember about that, I don't know how
much gasoline was, a gallon. But we each put $10 in
the pot, the ones that didn't own the car, to buy
gas. And agreed that if that ran out, we'd put some
more in. But it never ran out. We got all the way to
New York City on $30 worth of gas. And we were to meet
her husband in Grand Central Station, my friend
Alice, who had insisted that I stay with her.
So she was down there to meet us. It's amazing how we
even knew how to find that place. Right now, when
did he get there? Okay, nine days later. And during
that time, the 6th of August, they dropped the
atomic bomb. I thought, hmm, they dropped the
bomb. Didn't mean anything to me. I was waiting for
my husband to come home. No, I didn't take much
notice of that at all. But it's funny how I got in
touch with somebody that could... tell me what to
do and what not to do. In Menard, there was a man that
owned the theater there. And his name was Henry
Reeves. He was not like anybody else in Menard.
Well, he's got a really good story behind him, but I
won't try to tell you that. But he had some
relative. I'm not sure whether it was a son or
something else. But he was already back home from
the war. And he'd been with the same division that
Earl was with. And it was back in Philadelphia. And
so Henry gave me his number to call him in
Philadelphia. He said, he can tell you what to do.
So when I got to New York, I called him and got him.
And he put me in touch with a Colonel Jones at the
port of embarkation. And that man had also been
with the 28th Division. So he was so helpful to me.
And he said, I know that you would like to go down and
see him get off the boat. He told me what boat he was
coming in on, something I'd never heard of. And he
said, you just stay where you are, and I will let him
know your number. Well, not only did he let him know
the number to reach me, he sent it to Earl 30 miles at
sea. So he knew where to get in touch. And of course,
he had no earthly idea I was even going to be in New
York. And I didn't either. At first, we had thought
about it. But then we decided that travel was so
difficult that we better not try that. I'd meet him
somewhere else. But it worked out. So that's what
gave me my first taste of New York. And I decided I
didn't like New York. Alice got us a reservation at
the Pierre Hotel. It's still a very fancy hotel
where all the presidents and so on stay. And I was so
country, I didn't know anything. And I had my
little suitcase, and I was out on the corner
waiting for a cab. And men in New York would just
elbow you out of the way if a cab came along. I
thought, I don't like this. But anyway, I finally
got down there.
It was a lovely hotel. Describe the scene when he
got off the boat and you first saw him. I didn't see
him. He told me to stay in her apartment and he would
give Earl the word of where to call me. He also said,
don't expect to see him for 24 hours because they
have this debriefing or whatever. So I was
prepared not to see him, but I went on down and got in
the room at the hotel. And four o'clock, he landed
about nine in the morning, and four o'clock he was
at the door. That's pretty exciting. Hadn't seen
him in two years. Hadn't seen him in two years. And
Alice, when she was out visiting with me, she was
always taking movies of the kids and whatever was
going on out there. So she had a party at her
apartment and showed all those. So Earl got to kind
of catch up on what the kids were looking like, you
know. Right. How did he appear? That first view
after the war was over compared with your memory of
him before he left? He was pretty trim. He still
weighed about 218, and yet he was just as trim
because, oh, the training they had, you know. Now,
did you, as he walked or did anything, did you
detect any of the effects of the injuries? No, not
at all. And then he had a 30-day leave, and the plan
was that the division was to reassemble at Camp
Shelby, Mississippi. I thought I wouldn't
remember that one, but I did. It's out of
Hattiesburg. And be sent to the Pacific Theater.
That was the plan. But during the 30-day leave that
he was at home... war with japan ended see after
dropping those atomic bombs a couple of them they
gave it gave it up and so he thought that he'd just go
over there and they'd say go home you know didn't
work that way so he called me again won't you over
here by let's see call me sunday morning i want you
over here by tuesday noon because tuesday evening
they have the final dinner so i had to I was a
creature of habit. I didn't usually wash with my
little ringer-type washing machine, which I had
to pull over next to the sink. I didn't wash until
Monday. But that day I did. I washed on Sunday. And I
just took it from the ringer in a pan over to the lady
that ironed for me, left that afternoon, because
he wanted me there by Tuesday noon. And I made it.
But we spent one night on the road I've forgotten
where. But he was, like I said, he was in the habit of
giving orders, and he had given to me. He wanted me
somewhere at a certain time. All right. Then when
is he discharged, or released, maybe you should
say? Well, that, I said, you know, right now, I'm
writing to somebody about something. See, for
Earl's 35 years in the reserve, I get absolutely
nothing. And I shouldn't put that on this tape, but
I don't care. And any time the Army wanted
anything, there wasn't any question in Earl's
mind, he did it. And while I was still over there at
Camp Shelby, that's where I went for the final
dinner. And
I had looked around for a place to live because I
thought we might just be staying there for a while.
And when I finally found something I thought might
work, he got orders from wherever. They wanted him
to be in command of a victory loan train, it was
called. Did you ever hear of that? And it had all
kinds of war souvenirs, and they'd send it around
the whole United States, selling war bonds to help
pay for the war. So he didn't, that, let's see, that
must have been in September. And he didn't get home
until two days before Christmas. And it really
made me mad because he'd been gone two years and he
got home. And I'd had to, you know, take care of the
kids and all, everything for that length of time.
Then darned if they didn't snatch him up again. But
he never questioned anything like that. All
right. So then he is released from active duty
about the beginning of 1946. Yeah. And so where did
you go? In April of 1946, he was elected mayor of
Brady.
I've been having some calls that there's nobody
there. I've been hoping I'd hear from Anne. See,
she's been gone a week today. She's in France. Oh,
that's right. She told me she was going. And my
granddaughter, I sent her. 17 years old. She's a
cutie. Y'all moved then to Brady, and where did you
live? No, we were still in Brady. I was already
there. Yeah. But we bought another house. Oh, you
bought a house. Uh-huh. All right, and he comes
back and starts to do what? In Brady, well, he had a
member of the Rangers that he was determined that
he wanted to go into business with Earl. So as I say,
Earl had this drug store, a half interest in it. And
Frank Carter was this fellow's name. And he was an
Aggie, finished in 40. And Frank had been wounded
severely in the war on D-Day. When Frank came to see
me, Frank and Elizabeth and their little girl, who
was nine days younger than, older than Ann,
it suddenly made me realize what a war could do.
Because Frank had just graduated from A&M, you
know, and looked good. And when he came to see me, he
had a temporary eye. He'd lost one eye, lost all of
his teeth. On D-Day, it's a wonder he even
survived. And they put in a Goodyear and GE store.
And then they bought a service station just so they
could have a place to mount the tire. And my parents
had given us our part of the ranch. And with the
ranch and two business, look after that was about
all he wanted to do. All right, so, and at that
point, you were a stay-at-home mother. Oh, yes,
and adding to the family. That's what I was going to
say. Right along. All right, and then so he plunges
into the life of the town and soon is elected mayor
of Brady. He had only been home since two days
before Christmas and got elected in April. My, my.
All right, then... His opponent was a longtime
mayor, I might add. Uh-oh, uh-oh. Now, and
everybody would agree that Brady is in the hill
country, wouldn't they? Well, yeah, at least our
ranch is. I didn't know that growing up, but
somebody gave me a little pamphlet called Guide to
the Texas Hill Country, and it defines exactly
where it is. And I got a map and drew it out, and I
thought, well, So both of you were then from the
hill country? I guess so. Okay. Now, in 1948, I
understand that Mr. Rutter got involved in the
U.S. Senate campaign. Yes, he did. Very
thoroughly. Please describe that as you remember
it. Well, Lyndon Johnson, as everybody knows, was
quite a distinct character. And I remember him
coming to the House, and he said, Earl, now...
Johnson's opponent in that race was Coke
Stevenson, who was a rancher on the other side of
Junction, and my parents were strong for him. They
could hardly stand the idea of Earl taking over
Johnson's campaign. He wanted Earl to be his
campaign manager in our district, which had about
16 or 18 counties. And he said, now, Earl, you won't
be able to carry McCulloch County, that's where
Brady is, because you're too close to my opponent.
But just do the best you can with it. And as you know,
he won the statewide election by 87 votes, and they
dubbed him Landslide Linden. But when they
counted the votes in McCulloch County, that
county went for him by more votes than he won the
statewide election. Oh, really? Oh. And so from
then on, Earl was his fair-haired boy. And he had us
down, they did, for a lunch at their apartment in
Austin. for a football game, and we got the
experience of a wild ride across Austin with
Lyndon Johnson at the wheel in a convertible. And,
oh, they just were very nice to us, and always were.
And after he became president, then, you know, it
was a very opportune time. If Earl needed help in
Washington with Lyndon Johnson and Tiger Teague,
he could pretty well get it. And Jake Pickle. And
Jake Pickle, yeah. During that campaign, what did
Mr. Rudder, what did he do? Did he write letters,
make speeches? Yeah, and he had campaign workers
in every county. And I'll never forget, we had a
dinner at Brady Country Club. It doesn't even have
food service. So we had to get the food brought in.
And there were two women out there. I was one of
them, and then Dorothy Green from Eden, Earl's
good friend's wife. And we were over there to
handle the kitchen. And just ask the men, not their
wives. And we had about 250 acceptances and had
over 300 that came. And I could tell we were running
out of food. So we had to send in to get food. Anyway,
he was there, of course.
But then after that, gosh, back in 66, when they
were in the White House, they invited us up for a
dinner for Henry Cabot Lodge. And that was pretty
exciting for me. I'd never been in the White House
at all, Earl had, because Lyndon Johnson had sent
him on a fact-finding tour. And I don't know what
year that was, but it was before 66. And just a small
group of them, but Earl was to check on the
educational opportunities in Vietnam. And I do
know the only female on the trip was Ovita Cup
Hobby. I've forgotten what she, but anyway,
we went up for that, for the dinner for Henry Cabot
Lodge. It was very nice. I was very impressed,
because I saw so many important people that I never
thought I'd see. But you know, A&M had had, Tiger
had helped so much with getting speakers for
SCONA, the Student Conference on National
Affairs. I knew a lot of those because they came to
this party. Sure, sure. What was your impression
of, I presume before 1948, you did not know Mrs.
Johnson, Lady Byrne? Well, I knew her sometime.
I've got pictures with her. What was your
impression of her? She was always very nice. Very
friendly, very nice. I think she's top-notch. Oh,
yeah, she is. And she's got to be patient to put up
with that. Super lady. And, you know, I didn't know
until I guess I got the battalion. Lucy spoke at...
Commencement. Yeah, the medical school
commencement. I was surprised. Saturday
morning. Yes. It quoted her some, you know, what
she'd said. But I don't know. She's going by the
name of Lucy Baines Johnson again, so I don't know
whether her second marriage is out or not. I don't
know. I don't know either. Okay, so 1948, and then
so win that campaign, and y'all are still in Brady.
Yep. And he's ranching and running the
businesses. Two businesses, yeah. And you're
adding to the number of children. Yeah. And then
Alan Shivers. Is it Alan Shivers that brings him to
Austin? Well, yeah. But before that, one of the
things Earl did as mayor, you know, Brady during
the war had an airfield training pilots. And After
the war was over, they deactivated it. And Earl, I
have a feeling that probably Lyndon Johnson let
him know, I don't know that. See, Earl kept a lot of
things to himself. I didn't know. But he found out
somehow from Washington that they were going to
deactivate that field. And you know, the Air Force
built things pretty darn nice. And so Earl goes to
Washington. And there's two hangars. There's
runways. There's shops. There's barracks.
Everything. Earl gets the whole thing for $23,000
for Brady. Oh, my goodness. And
anyway, it
was going along fine until the labor organizers
came down from Dallas and organized labor union,
and then they started having strikes. And every
time they had a strike, they'd call Earl to mediate
it because he knew everybody that worked out
there. And finally they just said, you just got to
go to work out there to run the thing. Well, I
remember him telling me, he said, I know what I'll
do. He said, I'll just put my salary so high they
won't hire me. Because he didn't really want to. He
put his salary at $12,000 a year. And they hired
him. That's what he was doing when he was appointed
land commissioner. All right. and they were
manufacturing wings the Martin bombers and they
they employed over 800 out there and of course we
were in the midst of this seven-year drought and
these little these ranchers were employed at this
plant kept them from going broke so it was a real
good thing and during all this time you all
maintained the ranch yeah your ranch Where did he
and Alan Shivers first have a connection? Well,
Earl came home from that war, and he said, War is
such a terrible thing. If you don't want it to
happen again, you better get to work on the home
front to keep it from happening. So he just
launched into everything. Among things he did, he
got elected to the State Democratic Executive
Committee. If you remember, Haskell, there
weren't any Republicans. Right. Just a little
handful, maybe in Dallas. And they didn't matter.
No. And anyway, the Democratic Party was just the
same as two parties, the liberal faction and the
conservative faction. Well, Shivers and Earl,
too, were conservative. And so that's how the
governor got to know Earl, was through that State
Democratic Executive Committee. and then he was
elected the state board of public welfare and I
don't know what all but he sure didn't want another
war and so then when things fell apart
you know the land office story you know that don't
you now Are you aware of who suggested or how Mr.
Rudder's name came to Alan Shivers to do that task?
I think Shivers just did it himself. That's what I
think. See, here's the one that he succeeded.
There you go. Yeah, Bascom Giles. Yeah. All right.
How did y'all, how did Shivers communicate?
That's his grandson. He's a doctor here. Well
respected. You know him. Yes, yes. Yeah, that's
his grandson. How did Governor Shivers
communicate? Oh, it shocked Earl to death. Was it a
phone call? No. There's a lawyer there in Brady,
Ben Davis Gieselin. I don't know if he's still a
lawyer or not, but he was at UT when I was. Anyway, he
had to go to Austin for something, seeing somebody
in the Capitol, and so he wanted Earl to just drive
with him there. I said, okay, said I'll. drive with
you I'll go talk to the governor and Earl had
somebody in mind and I don't know who it was that he
thought would be nice to appoint as land
commissioner and so when he got there at the
capitol he went to the governor's office and Alan
Shivers was there and so when Earl said well he had
an idea who somebody he might want to consider he
said we've already decided. And Earl said, well,
who? He said, you. Oh, Earl, and he fainted. And so
Earl, he gave Earl until 10 o'clock the next
morning to make up his mind. Well, it had, the news
had come out over radio because we didn't, still
didn't have TV. And we got home, no.
That must be the next day. It was. Anyway, he said he
had to make up his mind by 10 o'clock the next day.
Well, I had, of course, by then, five children. Bob
was just a baby. He knew he was premature and all
this stuff. And... I just knew there was something
bad wrong with my health. And my doctor, who was
also our good friend, said, he called me by my silly
nickname, so I'm not going to divulge that. He
said, nothing wrong with you, but five kids and no
help. He said, but if you'll feel better, I will
send you through the clinic in Fort Worth. And that
was the day that I was to go through the clinic. So we
get up early. And so on the way to Fort Worth for me to
go through the clinic, Earl and I talked this over,
and I said, Earl, you just do what you want to do,
because I said, my work's cut out for me with these
five children. And Earl had very decided ideas
about how to run a family. He ran his job and
business. I ran the house and the children.
Anyway, but if anything important, of course, he
made the decision. So we got back, of course, after
going through the clinic and then driving home. It
was late, and they had already come out with the
fact on the evening news that Earl was the new land
commissioner because Earl went in the telephone
booth there at the clinic and called Shivers and
said he'd take it. So then we got home, and the house
was full of people. And, you know, Brady's a little
town. Everybody knew us and all. So we didn't get
everybody shooed out until midnight. Next
morning, we got up at 5.30, and it was pouring rain,
which was rare. And the doorbell rang, and I was
still in my robe. And I answered the door, and I told
them, come on in. It was an Angelo paper. They had a
reporter and a photographer, and they came in. I
told them, just make themselves at home. I had to go
get ready. But we made it. Now, that's what year?
55. 55. And you moved then to Austin. You know, he
took office in January. I said, he
took office, and he left me with a pickup. We had a
car and a pickup for the ranks. He left me with a
pickup and five children. But... He didn't have
time to concentrate on finding a place for us to
live. So we didn't get a house until, to move into
until a week before school started. And so you and
the children then moved over there? Yeah. And he
served for how long? Well he's, see it was just a
two-year term at that time. And so in one year, I
remember the first thing he told me, he said, you
know, I don't know who in that office is in cahoots
with the commissioner. So I've got to get somebody
around me I know I can trust. So there was a
classmate of his that lived on a farm between Brady
and Rochelle and his wife taught school in
Rochelle and they had three kids just scratching
out a living so he picked this fella up and he did
real well and took him and but that's what he said he
had to have somebody around him he knew he could
trust So it was an Aggie classmate of him. Okay, so,
all right, he is appointed in 55, then he's elected
to a full term in 56. Yeah. A full two-year term.
Yeah. He had a two-year term to serve, but you had to
run before your term was up, you know. And so,
actually, that was... crazy summer he knew that I
couldn't leave the house and go help with a
campaign anywhere so we had this big old two-story
house with a full basement below that had outside
entrance so he decided we'd have campaign
headquarters in our house and my job was to serve
refreshments every night oh boy and so he had
campaigned all over the state and The top fellows
at the land office would come out. They got out the
campaign material. I didn't have anything to do
with that. But we thought we'd be lucky to have a
dozen volunteers a night. We had 68 or more than
that. I've forgotten exactly. But anyway,
I was making coffee in two little coffee pots.
until one of the fellows that was getting out the
campaign material came. He said, is that the way
you've been serving coffee? I was pouring it up and
everything I had. And I said, yeah. He said, well,
I'll get one from the church. And so we made coffee
in big bunches in. But anyway, we had two ping pong
tables end to end with 25 typewriters going around
them in the game room. See, the big part of the
basement was a big game room and it had a bar and I had
a refrigerator and everything and we had a dumb
waiter that came down from the kitchen and I could
send food down. Anyway, I have forgotten how long
that lasted but seemed like a long time to me. And
you all won the election by a good margin. Yeah,
I've forgotten exactly. It was kind of tight at
first. We had a little cause for concern, but it
came out okay. And the fellow that he ran against
was a good friend of Price Daniels, was county
judge over at Tyler.
Mr. Rutter is proceeding to clean up the land
office. And he did it in one year. Who are the people
that he came to... respect and rely upon most? Who
were his key? You know one of them. I think, yes.
Clark Diebel. That's what I thought. Yeah, Clark
was one of those that discovered the land scandal.
He and a newspaper man, I used to know his name, but I
can't think of it today. I think he was from Quero.
But anyway, Now, y'all didn't know the Diebels
before you got to Austin. No. Okay, so he... No, but
see, after Clark had been one of the two that
discovered the scandals, Earl got... He was
working for the state auditor at that time, and
Earl got him to come over and go to work in the land
office. Clark was a fine, fine person. I agree.
And... Who else? Well, at the land office? Yeah,
that were key people. Carl Lynn... I've lost
contact with Carl. L-I-N-D? L-I-N-D. L-I-N-D,
Carl. And Arthur Sherlock, and I know where Arthur
is, but he's not in very good shape now. He was the
one that was classmate. S-H-A-R-L-A?
S-H-A-R-L-A-C-H, I think, Sherlock. He was class
of 32, like Earl was. Anyway, oh, there were others
that I knew at the time, but I've kind of forgotten
them after all these years. Do you remember any
anecdotes about midnight phone calls or anybody
threatening anything during the land office
days? No. You know, some odd things happened. Such
as? Like in Brady, there was an attorney there that
had something to do with something, I don't know
what, but they put a bomb in his car and he almost was
killed. And... But there was one fella in Brady, it
was so funny that he did his best to get Earl not
elected, not
re-elected because Earl, he had served on the city
council and Earl discovered that he had been
setting himself up a special utility rate and he
was one of the biggest utility rate users in the
town of Brady. Anyway, well, I'm just chattering
now. No, no, no, that's good. And he had Earl's
opponent come out for the... See, G. Raleigh White
Downs is a racetrack at Brady, and still is.
Anyway,
so this man had Earl's opponent out there and had
him introduced at the races and everything. So I
had a call from a friend there in Brady, and she
said... put those five kids in the car and all the
campaign material you can get your hands on and get
on out here. Said, Wilson has had your husband's
opponent introduced and all. So the next day I did.
And we put up campaign material between Austin and
Brady. Had a flat on the bridge going across Llano
River and ruined a tire. And I had to try to find a new
tire on the 4th of July. That was kind of hard. The
only place we could find it was open to distribute
our campaign material was a beer jar. And we went in
there, my little kids.